---
title: "Getting Uncomfortable"
date: 2022-02-23T20:12:19-05:00
draft: false
description: "my experience learning without doing"
toc: false
images:
tags:
  - learning
  - full stack open
  - courses
---

Over the past few weeks after I decided I wanted to try the self-taught path as opposed to taking the easy way out and doing a bootcamp, I've been thinking a lot about learning. More specifically, I've been thinking about how I can most effectively learn the necessary skills to become employable as a full-stack developer in a reasonable timeframe. For a while now, I've known the most effective way that I learn (and that I believe most people learn), which is project-based learning. <!--more--> You think of a project you want to make, like a Discord bot for example. Instead of watching a tutorial series or taking a udemy course on Javascript fundamentals, the Discord API, and database funadamentals, you simply start working on the project, generally using documentation to get everything up-and-running. When you get to a feature implementation that you don't know how to code, or when you realize a solution you thought would work wasn't working, you then try and find a solution to that more focused problem, learning whatever you have to to get it done. Once you have found all of the solutions to all of your problems, not only do you get the dopamine spike from completing a project and adding real, tangible value to the world, you also have a pretty great understanding of the language you used, the discord api, and any other technologies you employed to make a working bot. This gives you the confidence and knowledge to try and make another project, expanding on your previously gained knowledge. The cycle continues and before you know it, you have a portfolio of projects and more knowledge than you ever would've gained from those classes. 

I know this, and yet I still get so tempted by the oh-so-shiny new Udemy course that everyone is talking about. I still convince myself that I need to go through tutorial websites and learn x, y, and z Javascript concepts before I start on this project, or before I learn react. It seems like it makes so much sense. I want to be a web developer, therefore I need to learn HTML and CSS, no matter how much of a backend dev I think I am. The best is when I try and rationalize it in my head, by convincing myself that I'm just a beginner and I only need one course, or even one small part of one course. However, not only has this train of thought consistently failed to actually teach me anything, it becomes detrimental to my progress quickly. I think the reason for this lies in that being in a class, being a part of any curriculum, feels very safe. When I'm finishing sections of the class and getting dopamine hits, it feels like I'm getting something done, and I'm getting closer to my end goal. Copying code is just so easy, and you forget that you're copying code when you finish the course and have a shiny new to-do list! Or a working calculator! 

For me, I know that taking a course makes me push back on obligations that might be more mentally taxing and time-consuming (like a full stack project idea I thought of) until I get to the relevant section of the course I'm taking. If there's one thing I know about learning new things, its that you absolutely have to push your boundries. You don't know what you don't know until you try. Not only that, but you'd be amazed by what you are capable of when you actually dedicate focused, concentrated effort towards solving a problem. I don't know about you, but when I watch a YouTube video of someone coding, there are no boundries being pushed I can tell you that much for certain. And even though it might be pleasing in the moment, nothing is more fulfilling and addicting than making stuff from scratch. Even simple stuff. If I make a google chrome extension that takes me two hours to code but it serves an actual purpose in my life, that provides infinitely more value to me than coding along with someone through a social media clone or whatever.

I will no doubt talk more about this subject in future posts, and I want to keep the scope of this post somewhat small as I could go on forever about this. Really just wanted to stop putting it off and just write something. You gotta write bad stuff before you write good stuff, at least I hope. I'm glad I got my first real post out though, and I'm happy I started this blog. Hopefully this keeps me accountable. From this day onwards, no more bullshit classes in place of a project. Open source, hackathons, and Finland, here I come!

